[Unknown]: I.V.M
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Most of the episodes of this podcast have been
[Amit Varma]: about economics or politics, about public policy in other words. But even private actions
[Amit Varma]: have seen and unseen effects. In today's episode, I want to examine the seen and unseen
[Amit Varma]: effects of parenting or parenthood. My guest today on the show is Natasha Badwar. Natasha
[Amit Varma]: is a columnist, filmmaker, entrepreneur, but is best known for her remarkable column on
[Amit Varma]: parenting that has appeared every week in Mint for the last six years. Now, I hate kids
[Amit Varma]: and have no interest in parenting, but week on week, I find her column insightful and
[Amit Varma]: deeply moving for what it reveals about being human. She doesn't look at parenthood or herself
[Amit Varma]: through a glossy filter, but with unflinching honesty, and that relentless week on week
[Amit Varma]: self-awareness and self-examination contains many deep and unique insights. Natasha has
[Amit Varma]: recently released a book, My Daughter's Mum, and I strongly recommend it to all my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: I caught up with her recently to chat about what she has learnt about parenthood in all
[Amit Varma]: these years of writing about it.
[Guest]: Natasha, welcome to the show.
[Guest]: Hello, I'm really happy to be on this show.
[Amit Varma]: Natasha, I'm not normally an audience for parenting columns. In fact, I'm a determined
[Unknown]: non parent and I don't like kids.
[Unknown]: I'm not an audience for parenting columns either.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. However, I've been reading your column with great interest for the six plus years
[Amit Varma]: that you've been writing it. And partly because I feel what they do is in a very gentle, sensitive
[Amit Varma]: way reveal human nature. It's not just about children or parenting, but it's about looking
[Amit Varma]: deeper at people and things that we take for granted. Now, in today's episode, I'd like
[Amit Varma]: to sort of talk about the seen and unseen effects of parenting. Now, we all know the
[Amit Varma]: scene effects that the scene effects on the positive side is that it's fulfilling. You
[Amit Varma]: have your own flesh and blood and you watch them grow. They look after you in your old
[Amit Varma]: age. If you run out of food, you can eat them. And on the negative side, they disrupt your
[Amit Varma]: life completely. Women especially often have to give up their careers or their independent
[Amit Varma]: dreams to have their kid. And essentially, the life that you live is completely different
[Amit Varma]: from what it would have been without the kids. And many people become parents before they're
[Amit Varma]: ready for it. These are sort of cliched tropes, you know, which many have gone over. And I
[Amit Varma]: enjoy it. I enjoy your column and your book so much because it looks at everyday happinesses
[Amit Varma]: and sorrows, which are not sort of from that playbook. And you get the sense in all your
[Amit Varma]: writing that by watching your children grow up with such attention, you are also growing
[Amit Varma]: up yourself and becoming a different person and discovering yourself. So can you tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit more about what writing about this has done to you?
[Unknown]: Okay, so you've said it all. You've spoken for me. I'm going to just record this and
[Unknown]: use it in one of my columns. But yeah, you're right. It's growing up with the children is
[Guest]: a process of growing up. And it's not always a voluntary process of growing up. It kind
[Guest]: of jolts you out of your, you know, your notions of normalcy, your notions of what is right
[Guest]: and what is wrong, what is a decent way of living. And I didn't expect this. I agree
[Guest]: with you that a lot of people have children before they're ready for it. And I also agree
[Guest]: with you that we shouldn't have children unless we really, really desperately want to have
[Guest]: them. But I, you know, I was 31 when I was 32, when my first child was born, and I'd
[Guest]: always wanted to be a parent. So for me, whether I was going to have a biological child or
[Guest]: not, I, you know, I'd been ready to adopt a child. And I'd been kind of looking at adoption.
[Guest]: So I was one person who really felt that she was ready to be a parent. And the first couple
[Guest]: of years were fairly, you know, simple. The only things that I had to battle against were
[Guest]: the stereotypes that others were thrusting upon me. But as soon as my daughter was old
[Guest]: enough to go to school, you know, as soon as she was ready to start speaking her mind,
[Guest]: expressing herself, and as soon as we had two children, and we had to deal with the
[Guest]: dynamic of the first one suddenly discovering that she's not the center of the universe,
[Guest]: me discovering that I do not have enough hands, you know, one that is at work on the smartphone,
[Guest]: the other that is holding the baby, the head that is paying attention to the husband, and,
[Guest]: you know, now I had a new baby, and I was besotted with the new baby. So I didn't have
[Guest]: any time for anyone else. So, you know, from there started a process where I have literally
[Guest]: discovered that every day, you are forced to learn something new, that every now and
[Guest]: then, you forget the lessons that you have learned yesterday. For example, just then
[Guest]: in the last two months, our middle child, she's 12. And she's, you know, she's she's
[Guest]: going through what everyone would call a phase, she'll get over it, you know, nevermind, don't
[Guest]: don't take it too seriously. But she's angsting over something she's not at peace with the
[Guest]: world with the family with herself. And, and I discovered that because I have been writing
[Guest]: about because I have because I have the column and I am, you know, a deadline bound to write
[Guest]: every week about what's going on in my life. I discovered that she was actually going through
[Guest]: the same phase when she was three years old, and then the same phase when she was seven
[Guest]: years old, that when I describe how she was behaving, or how I felt she was feeling at
[Guest]: that age of three, and at that age of seven, and now at the age of 12, the words were exactly
[Guest]: the same. And I would not have made that connection. If I hadn't actually written about it, I didn't
[Guest]: even remember that I had written about it, I just chanced upon the same thing, which
[Guest]: also goes to show that, you know, you deal with a situation and you and you forget about
[Guest]: it, you don't make the connections. And somewhere I feel that popular culture, popular parenting
[Guest]: culture, family culture, doesn't want you to make the connections. Because when you
[Guest]: do, you then begin to question the entire structure of the family, the hierarchy within
[Guest]: the family, not only the nuclear family, but also the extended family, you then have to
[Guest]: question the structure of our education system. You may have chosen as a parent, the finest
[Guest]: school in the city, and you know, you think your job is done. Yeah, now I have put together
[Guest]: the finances and I have used my influence and I have charmed the principal into accepting
[Guest]: my children and look what I've done for my child. And your child comes back home in despair.
[Guest]: And you don't know what is it? Is it something that I didn't do right? Because that's always
[Guest]: your first thought as a parent? Is it something that's happening in the school, you go and
[Guest]: have a conversation with the school and they're listening to you, they're empathetic, but
[Guest]: they don't have a solution. And the child is too young, too confused, too isolated as
[Guest]: an individual to be able to articulate what is it that is getting to her. And you realize
[Guest]: that, you know, what is supposed to make you happy doesn't always make you happy. You can
[Guest]: offer her the finest dance class and, you know, take her for football and buy her the
[Guest]: best kit and give her the best coach. But not enough has changed in society. Our notions
[Guest]: of gender, our notions of authority, you must, you know, if your coach says so, he's right,
[Guest]: you must listen to it. You haven't questioned your own relationship with each other as parents.
[Guest]: You know, you're very together. You may be you may have read the same, you know, books
[Guest]: and had the same influences. And, you know, you feel that, OK, you've got this liberal
[Guest]: minded guy and you want the same kind of future for your child. You want the same kind of
[Guest]: values in your child. But but you're kind of repeating a script between yourselves where
[Guest]: he can get angry and you will cry in the corner every time you have an argument. And your
[Guest]: child, like every other child in the history of mankind, is witnessing the same kind of
[Guest]: dynamics between the gender and finding it not just because children can see that. Children,
[Guest]: children, you know, they respond to their feelings. Still, we have actually wiped out
[Guest]: the ability to do that. And somewhere in popular culture, we are always telling parents, don't
[Guest]: take them too seriously. Which you feel is a mistake, which is an absolute mistake, because
[Guest]: you're also being told as a new parent, you don't know what is happening. Let me tell
[Guest]: you what is happening. And, you know, you know, you know, because you're so deeply connected
[Guest]: with that new baby. And sometimes you don't know, but you do know that what is being told
[Guest]: to you is not exactly what you are feeling. So you struggle as a parent to name experiences,
[Guest]: to name feelings that have not been expressed either in other people's writing or in everyday
[Guest]: conversations. And like you said, you know, it's not only that you you find that you don't
[Guest]: have a language to accurately represent what is hurting you and what is confusing you.
[Guest]: You also don't have one to accurately represent the highs, the happinesses, you know, those
[Amit Varma]: little moments that make it worthwhile.
[Amit Varma]: Because since you were writing a weekly column, and every week you had a deadline and you
[Amit Varma]: had to put a column out there on parenting, was that heightened awareness of what your
[Amit Varma]: child is doing and how you're interacting with them and it heightened self awareness,
[Amit Varma]: something that either helped or hurt you in different ways in the actual job of parenting?
[Guest]: Yeah. So, you know, when I, I had begun to write about everyday moments on my social
[Guest]: media, I had begun to blog about it anonymously. Because what went on my blog was something
[Guest]: that I was still trying to figure out. I didn't want anyone else to tell me how to feel about
[Guest]: it. So that was a space that I protected. Then if I felt that it was something that,
[Guest]: you know, was entertainment or entertaining, or, you know, it had some humor, or it, I
[Guest]: would share it on Facebook, you know, just tentatively within my own circle of friends.
[Guest]: And if Facebook said, Why are you thinking like this? Don't feel like this? What's really
[Guest]: going on? I'd say, Hey, wait, wait, wait, you're not being a good listener. I would
[Guest]: take it to Twitter. So even before the column was commissioned, I was writing in three different
[Guest]: spaces. And you know, I had a hierarchy completely private for an audience on Twitter that didn't
[Guest]: know me at all. So I could ignore them if I wanted to. And they could accept me if they
[Guest]: wanted to and for a circle of friends on Facebook, when the column got commissioned, and I had
[Guest]: been hoping to, to write formally for a larger platform. I actually sat down and cried. I
[Guest]: was like, Oh, my God, this is the end of my life, because now I'm going to have to be
[Guest]: a good parent. Because it's not worth writing anything unless it's honest. And if I'm not
[Unknown]: going to do a good job, it's going to be really hard to put it out there.
[Guest]: Did it change your parenting, the self awareness?
[Guest]: I think in the long run, it changed us in the sense that we all through the words that
[Guest]: got written, learned to listen to each other better. And what I discovered when I began
[Guest]: to write about is, was that what I was really struggling to make a breakthrough in was my
[Guest]: relationship with my own parents. Because you realize that you cannot cut through the
[Guest]: bushes and charter a path for your family with your children, till you have also gone
[Guest]: back and figured out where you're coming from. And what is it that influences you? Why are
[Guest]: some things easier and something so hard for you to do? And it makes you think something
[Guest]: happened that I have forgotten, or that I have, that has made me very angry about something.
[Guest]: So you know, if the if the water ran out in the house, I would go into a panic. And my
[Guest]: husband would be like, it's just water, it will come back. And it made me connect to
[Guest]: a memory when my mother would panic when the water would run out, you know, ages ago. And
[Guest]: at that time, if it ran out, and we were on the fourth floor, it would not come for a
[Guest]: couple of days, but I was in the you know, new millennium, and it would come in a couple
[Guest]: of hours. But I had inherited a kind of, you know, a fear. And, and I mean, that's a really
[Guest]: small example. But there are many other things where you find that there are emotional blocks
[Guest]: that there are some things that just trigger you. Some things come really easily to you.
[Guest]: You buy them a certain kind of shoe, you dress them up in a certain kind of way. And it doesn't
[Guest]: quite fit with the times or with the trends. And it takes you back into your childhood.
[Guest]: So how it changed us was really when I began to write, how I understood them, they began
[Guest]: to understand how I was trying to understand them. And somewhere the words helped us misunderstand
[Guest]: each other less. Because I think that really is the, you know, is the roadblock in all
[Unknown]: intimate relationships. Because at some point, you know, you have just piled up the misunderstandings
[Amit Varma]: and you don't know. And often what happens in relationships, whether they're marital
[Amit Varma]: relationships or parental relationships is that you just have two parties talking past
[Guest]: each other. Yeah. But in this case, I guess you're paying more close attention.
[Guest]: Not only that, you're, you have two parties from very, very different upbringings. Right.
[Guest]: So one is reacting very strongly to something, the other one thinks this is nothing. And,
[Guest]: and then the hurts begin to accumulate. You did not pay attention to my feelings. You
[Guest]: always do that. And the conversation doesn't go beyond that, because we don't have a template.
[Guest]: Our parents didn't go beyond that. No one else is going beyond that. You don't really
[Guest]: want to go to a psychiatrist or a therapist, because you don't feel that, you know, the
[Guest]: situation is that bad. And yet there is those little things. Yeah, there are those little
[Guest]: knots. And because I had to write week after week, it wasn't a choice I made. It was those
[Amit Varma]: knots that wanted to be unraveled. So my other question here is that as your kids grew up,
[Amit Varma]: they became aware that mommy writes a column. And presumably, they began to read it also
[Amit Varma]: at some point. And did that, for example, affect their attitude towards you or their
[Amit Varma]: behavior? Because like, was there a performative element to that? You know, in the back of
[Guest]: the head, would they be aware that, oh, she may write about this or? Yeah. So my middle
[Guest]: daughter, she was the first one to put it on the table. So there would be things she
[Guest]: would show me that she would say, don't put this out. You know, so clearly, there was
[Guest]: an awareness that if she likes it very much, she Instagrams it, you know, or she makes
[Guest]: a Facebook post out of it. And they enjoyed my enjoyment of things. But when they felt
[Guest]: that something was private, she was the first one. She activated the opt out clause. Yeah,
[Guest]: yeah, she did. So she was the first one to do that. And then what I get from them in
[Guest]: a sense is, you know, my oldest daughter, she's now 14. She read the book, and she was
[Guest]: the second person to read the book throughout. And her initial reactions would be, you know,
[Guest]: she would see herself as a younger version of herself. And she would connect. Oh, this
[Guest]: is something that I'm still angry about. Or I didn't like it when this happened. And,
[Guest]: you know, she would come back to me. But when she finished the book, she actually wrote
[Guest]: me an email. And that's the first review of the book. It really is a review of the book.
[Guest]: In which she writes, my mother is a hero on paper. And then she goes on to say that our
[Guest]: life is messier, angrier, harder than what it looks like in the column. But I understand
[Guest]: what she's trying to do. She writes about being the kind of parent she wants to be.
[Guest]: And in that sense, what has happened is that if, if I hadn't accessed the writer in me,
[Guest]: and tried to, you know, simplify things so that I could understand them, and that others
[Guest]: could resonate, that it would resonate with the stories of others, because the same thing
[Guest]: is happening in every family. What my children would have known of me would have been a mother
[Guest]: who tends to get very angry, who kind of gets into the victim position rather frequently,
[Guest]: more frequently than I like to remember, who struggles, and doesn't always do a great job
[Guest]: of figuring out her own feelings. But when I write, I am, I'm forced to figure them out.
[Guest]: So what they were getting access to was what I was trying to do, which is the one thing
[Guest]: that I realized I never had access to, with my own mother. So you try, try, try to understand
[Guest]: where your parent is coming from. And then you give up because you become powerful as
[Guest]: a young adult. And you just judge them and you, you know, push them into a bin. And you
[Guest]: say, I'm never going to make the same mistakes again, not realizing that eventually you're
[Guest]: going to behave as you have seen them behave and struggle with that behavior as well. So
[Guest]: the same thing happened with my mother. And I think that perhaps for me is the greatest,
[Guest]: I didn't anticipate it, but it is the greatest achievement of the book. And my mother once,
[Guest]: she read something and she came back to me and she said, and it had been a couple of
[Guest]: years. She said, I didn't know you think so hard. I didn't know, mujhe nahi pata tha ki
[Guest]: tu itna soshti hai cheezon ke paare. So you opened up your interior world to them. And
[Guest]: here, you know, I was opening up my interior world because I needed to, for myself. I was
[Guest]: actually going forward doing that because I had got an audience that was very, very
[Guest]: gentle and kind and receptive of that writing. But within our family, we didn't have a platform
[Guest]: in which we could talk to each other in the same way. And when she was reading me from
[Guest]: a very far distance, she was able to hear me in a way that she had not been able to
[Guest]: hear me as a parent. And I was able to hear her and speak of her in a way that I hadn't
[Guest]: been able to as her child.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting. A couple of weeks back on Facebook, you posted a lovely little
[Amit Varma]: piece by her. And what I was really struck by there was the assuredness of the writing,
[Amit Varma]: the quality of the sentences, you know, short, crisp sentences, keeping it really simple.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the clarity in that. Is that something that you think she picked up from your writing
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, because that is craft. You can be born with an artistic sense, but craft
[Amit Varma]: is something you have to work at. So I was very struck by that. Has she ever discussed
[Guest]: your writing with you?
[Guest]: So this is my oldest daughter, Seher. She has read me consistently. And, you know, I
[Guest]: wonder, so when she wrote this review of the book, and I call it a review, but she actually
[Guest]: wrote me a mail after reading the book, when she wrote it to me, I, I felt that she had
[Guest]: taken the kind of personal writing I was doing to a new level. And, you know, I was, I was
[Guest]: not ready to read that depth of truth. She actually pointed out to me things that I had
[Guest]: begun to gloss over myself. And it made me think that, you know, rather than the fact
[Guest]: that she may be influenced by me, it made me think that perhaps when I write, I am accessing
[Guest]: that cleaner thought process that, you know, what would we might call childlike, but we
[Guest]: always appreciate it when it comes out, you know, in writing, you know, straightforward.
[Guest]: And I know that I know how hard I have to work to be able to get that 1000 word column
[Guest]: out. So, you know, if it is submitted on a Tuesday morning, my brain has begun to work
[Guest]: on it from the Friday before that. And I will, you know, nap at odd hours, I will, you know,
[Guest]: go to sleep at three in the afternoon, I'll sit with my computer, I have begun to actually
[Guest]: fall asleep on the keyboard. And I realized that I'm not sleeping, I'm shutting down the,
[Guest]: you know, the very conscious thought process of what how should I create this and allowing
[Guest]: a much more organic thought process to to reveal itself and, you know, come out through
[Guest]: the typing. And so perhaps what she has is an is an original way of writing. She also
[Guest]: reads a lot. And it's it's amazing the, you know, they not only read what we read, while
[Guest]: we were growing up, but there is such a huge body of writing for young adults, now that
[Guest]: they access through the libraries, that and because we don't have TV, they really read
[Guest]: a lot. Because there's nothing else to do if they're not cycling or playing in the park.
[Guest]: So so a lot is coming from contemporary writing as well.
[Amit Varma]: And with you know, with regard to parenting itself, like, do you think that there are
[Amit Varma]: different levels of parenting that you end up doing? Because one is the actual parenting.
[Amit Varma]: And one, in a sense, is a performative parenting, which you're doing for yourself, as fodder
[Amit Varma]: for your own thing, that this is what I should do, or this is, you know, does that make you
[Amit Varma]: a different kind of parent?
[Guest]: Okay, so I'll tell you what my experience with parenting has been. I started with my
[Guest]: first child as this super enthusiastic, always attentive parent. And you know, I'm it by
[Guest]: the third year, I realized that I was performing. I was performing for myself, I was performing
[Guest]: for everybody else. I wanted my mother to see me as a certain kind of parent. I wanted
[Amit Varma]: my mother in law to see me as a certain kind of parent, to see myself as a certain kind
[Guest]: of parent. My parents lived nearby, and we would spend a lot of time with my mother in
[Guest]: law when the first child came in, first grandchild in the family and stuff like that. And so
[Guest]: my notion of the good parent was in itself very performative. And that has, that that
[Guest]: has decreased over the years, so that I have learned that if they ask me a question, a
[Guest]: tricky question, it is not my job to necessarily answer it. I'm just supposed to allow that
[Guest]: question to, to arrive in the space within the family and for everyone to think about
[Guest]: it as they want to. I am not the solution provider. I am not the one who has to fix
[Guest]: everything, which was not only a traditional notion of motherhood that's thrust upon you,
[Guest]: but also one that I had very actively embraced.
[Amit Varma]: And also a notion of adulthood, like completely unrelated to parenting. One of the things
[Amit Varma]: you figure out when you hit 40 years, both of us did a few years ago is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're not sorted. You're not supposed to have figured it all out. You've been winging
[Guest]: it all along and you'll continue to wing it and that's fine.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. And somewhere this comes from this very, very early question that every
[Guest]: adult is always firing at every child. What do you want to be when you grow up? You know,
[Guest]: and when we were in our early 20s, how can you not know what you want to do? Or if you
[Guest]: had a good job, how can you not want to do the same job for the rest of your life? And
[Guest]: it did ring true. None of this rang true to us. You know, as a generation, as a world,
[Guest]: we had come to a point where you could actually do many things that the most successful people
[Guest]: historically had actually also been prime ministers, also writing books, also, you know,
[Guest]: being sports people. So you, unless you are expressing all your talents, and you realize
[Guest]: by the time you're 40 that everybody is talented, that each one of us does not have that one,
[Guest]: two or three talents that were discovered by some generous soul when you were, you know,
[Guest]: in your early years, but that there is so much more to you. And it may not have revealed
[Guest]: itself when I was six or 15, but it will reveal itself when I'm 46. How come you started writing
[Guest]: you didn't used to write before? You know, so the notion is that every talent, you know,
[Guest]: that there is a certain number of things that you will be good at. And you discover that
[Amit Varma]: that's not true. And there doesn't need to be a linear path. So life is not like a school
[Amit Varma]: project that this is the aim. And this is how you get there. It's just a really messed
[Guest]: up journey, messy journey. Yeah. And even school projects, I mean, education systems
[Guest]: are constantly discovering that this one way of doing, you know, breaking it into subjects
[Guest]: and doing the learn and do the exam and then forget about it and learn something new is
[Amit Varma]: not the way we learn. And is it a process while parenting where you sort of disassociate
[Amit Varma]: from the parenthood aspect of it and just start relating to them in different ways as
[Amit Varma]: people as they grow older? You know, like in a sense, when you refer to Seher's email
[Amit Varma]: as your first review, for a moment, you've stepped back and you're, you know, it's a
[Amit Varma]: writer reviewer relationship almost. Does that happen more and more? Do you have to
[Amit Varma]: force it to happen and not stay in the parent mode?
[Guest]: It does happen more and more. And I think I got lucky with my first child. I was a very,
[Guest]: very serious, committed parent with my second child because I was taking it all so seriously.
[Guest]: I began to break down and crash and not be able to hold it all together and therefore
[Guest]: discover that I was not supposed to hold it all together. And with my third child, you
[Guest]: know, who we hadn't planned to have at all. But by the time we had our third child, I
[Guest]: had quit my job. I was, you know, trying out all kinds of new things in my life. And I
[Guest]: had calmed down. I had calmed down as a parent because I had seen an utter and complete defeat.
[Guest]: So I was, you know, at ground zero and ready to start again. And I didn't have any pressure
[Guest]: on me. We also almost lost her. So there was a very, very, you know, we had I'd had a very
[Guest]: emotional, traumatic time. And literally, it was like coming back from ground zero because
[Guest]: there was one point where we could have lost me also. And coming back from there, you know,
[Guest]: just kind of got me in touch with the core of what it's all meant to be about. And because
[Guest]: raising the third child was so different from the way I had behaved with the other two,
[Guest]: I learned through that, that I could behave in the same way with the middle child and
[Guest]: the older child that I was so easy with the new one, because just the fact that we had
[Guest]: survived it, we had come back home to living beings was enough for me. I had no other expectations.
[Guest]: That was just it remained enough for me for years. So I let her be. And then I was like,
[Guest]: why don't I let everyone else be? You know, why don't, why am I, you know, if I'm satisfied
[Guest]: just to be alive with this child, then I should be able to take that feeling to almost everything
[Guest]: else in my life. And that kind of, you know, it helped to break this whole perfectionist
[Guest]: mold that I had been quite besotted with. You know, you're good at something, you just
[Guest]: feel compelled to always be good at it. I am the best parent.
[Guest]: Not only that, even professionally. Yeah, absolutely. You've done really well at it,
[Guest]: then what's the next thing you can stop? You don't have to keep getting better at things.
[Guest]: And somewhere it just become over the years has helped me to form a much calmer worldview.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting. A lot of I've read a lot of writers on parenthood, but most of
[Amit Varma]: them looking at it from a vantage point or in retrospect, and you've almost been sort
[Amit Varma]: of live blogging parenthood in a manner of speaking. You've been a witness and a chronic
[Amit Varma]: clear of the reality show inside your own head and in your own life. So to sort of go
[Amit Varma]: back to parenting per se, what has this experience over the last decade and a half, which is
[Amit Varma]: culminated in this book, taught you about parenting? And if you could meet the 32 year
[Amit Varma]: old Natasha just about to embark on a journey, what advice would you give the 32 year old?
[Guest]: The advice I give to the 32 year old me is to calm down to take it easy and to slow down.
[Guest]: So those are the big lessons that don't try too hard and just things. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: What the 32 year old me was getting away with was being able to pretend to be okay, even
[Guest]: if she wasn't feeling okay, because that's what I had winged all the way up to there.
[Guest]: And when it all became too much for me, I had to completely change the way in which
[Guest]: I was surviving. And you realize as a parent that you can't just survive because then you're
[Guest]: just handing them the same template that, you know, if you want, you know that you want
[Guest]: them to have more privileges than you ever had. But to do that, you have to acknowledge
[Guest]: them to yourself. You have to give them to yourself. You have to tell yourself that it
[Guest]: is okay not to, you know, always not to depend on the endorsement of the outer world, not
[Guest]: to depend on validation from everyone else, because you think you can keep getting yours
[Guest]: while you will free them of that burden. But they'll only know how to free themselves of
[Guest]: that burden if you give it up in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: That's very enlightening. Thanks so much for talking to me, Natasha.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen, check out another hit show from Indus
[Amit Varma]: Works Media Networks, Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus
[Amit Varma]: Brocha. You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, this is your captain speaking. Sorry to say, but there's
[Unknown]: been a slight delay due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun. As you can see, there's
[Unknown]: death, destruction and chaos taking place all around us. But don't you worry, food and
[Unknown]: drinks will be served shortly. And I would recommend checking out IVM Podcasts to get
[Unknown]: some of your favorite Indian podcasts. We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows
[Unknown]: over. Thank you.